.ds dT /usr/lib/tmac
.TH MAN 5 "DWB 3.2"
.SH NAME
.B man
\- macros for formatting
.SM UNIX
system manual page entries
.SH SYNOPSIS
\*(mBtroff \-man\f1
.OP \-rs1 "" []
.OP "" options []
.OP "" files []
.sp 0.5v
\*(cBnroff \-man\f1
.OP "" options []
.OP "" files []
.SH DESCRIPTION
The manual page macros are used to lay out the format of the entries of this manual.
These macros are used by the
.BR man (1)
command.
.PP
The default page size is 8.5"\(mu11", with a 6.5"\(mu10" text area.
The
.OP \-rs1
option reduces these dimensions to 6"\(mu9" and 4.75"\(mu8.375", respectively; this
.BR troff -only
option also reduces the default type size from 10-point to 9-point, and the
vertical line spacing from 12-point to 10-point.
.PP
Macro usage is summarized below.
Type font and size are reset to default values before each paragraph and
after processing any macro that effects a change in font or size (e.g.,
.MR .I ,
.MR .RB ,
.MR .SM ).
Tab stops are neither used nor set by any macro except
.MW .DT
and
.MR .TH .
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.MW "wrong version of man entry macros (use -man6 if available)"
.in +3n
The macros used are not compatible with
.BR man (5),
but rather are defined in
the Version\ 6 man entry package.
Use the
.MW \-man6
option (if available) to format this manual page.
.SH CAVEATS
In addition to the macros, strings, and number registers listed in
.SM SUMMARY,
a number of internal macros, strings, and number registers are defined as well.
Except for names predefined by
.B troff 
and number registers
.MR d ,
.MR m ,
and
.MR y ,
all such internal names are of the form
.IR XA ,
where
.I X
is one of
.MR ) ,
.MR ] ,
and
.MR } ,
and
.I A
stands for any alphanumeric character.
.PP
In order to format and print manual pages on-line, the
.BR man (1)
command needs to know if any preprocessing is required.
If the first line of the manual page file has the format
.EX
\&'\e" \f2x \(el
.EE
where
.I x
can be
.MW t
for tables,
.MW e
for equations,
or
.MW te
for tables and equations;
the
.BR eqn (1)
and
.BR tbl (1)
preprocessors will be used as appropriate.
.PP
The programs that prepare the Table of Contents and the Permuted
Index for this manual assume the
.SM NAME
section of each entry consists of a single line of input that has the following format:
.EX
\f2name\f1\|[, \f2name\f1, \f2name\f1 \(el] \- \f2explanatory text\f1
.EE
The macro package increases the inter-word spaces (to eliminate ambiguity) in the
.SM SYNOPSIS
section of each entry.
.PP
This version of the manual page macros recognizes most macro commands defined
in other versions of
.SM UNIX
.BR man (5)
(e.g., from Research V10,
.SM "UCB BSD"
and SunOS systems).
Inclusion of these macros (see \s-1SUMMARY\s+1) ensures that text arguments are retained
and appear reasonable on output.
These macro definitions may not be identical to those on the originating system.
.SH BUGS
If the argument to
.MW .TH
contains
.I any
blanks and is
.I not
enclosed by double quotes (\*(mW""\fP),
there will be strange irregular dots on the output.
.SH FILES
.MW \*(dT/tmac.an
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR eqn (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR neqn (1),
.BR nroff (1),
.BR tbl (1),
.BR tc (1),
.BR troff (1)
.SH SUMMARY
.PP
Any macro argument
.I text
may be one to six strings;
any string that includes one or more blanks must be enclosed in a pair of
double quotes (e.g., if
.I text
is \*(mW"a\ few\ words"\f1).
If
.I text
is empty, the special treatment is applied to
the next line that contains text to be printed.
For example,
.MW .I
may be used to italicize a whole line, or
.MW .SM
followed by
.MW .B
to print text in the bold font and a smaller point size.
By default, hyphenation is turned off for
.BR nroff ,
but remains on for
.BR troff .
.PP
Default units for indents
.I in
are ens;
.I in
may be a scaled value (.e.g,
.MW 1.25i
or
.MR 4P).
When
.I in
is omitted, the previous indent is used.
.sp 4p
.nr X 6P
.in +\nXu
.de XX
.sp 2p
.in -\\nXu
.ta +\\nXu
.in +\\nXu
.ti -\\nXu
\&\f5\\$1\ \f2\\$2\f1\t\c
..
.XX .TH t\0s\0c\0n
Set the title and entry heading;
.I t
is the title,
.I s
is the section number,
.I c
is an extra commentary (e.g., ``local'')
.I n
is a new manual name.
Invokes
.MW .DT
(see below).
.XX .SH text
Place subhead
.I text
(e.g., ``\s-1SYNOPSIS\s+1'') here.
.XX .SS text
Place sub-subhead
.I text
(e.g., ``Options'') here.
.XX .PP
Begin a paragraph with normal font, point size, and indent;
.MW .P
is a synonym.
.XX .HP in
Begin paragraph with hanging indent.
.XX .TP in
Begin indented paragraph with hanging tag.
The next line that contains text to be printed is taken as the tag.
If the tag does not fit, it is printed on a separate line.
.XX .IP t\0in
Same as
.MR .TP ,
but with tag
.IR t ;
often used to get an indented paragraph without a tag.
.XX .RS in
Increase relative indent (initially zero).
Indent all output an extra
.I in
units from the current left margin.
.XX .RE k
Return to the
.IR k th
relative indent level (initially,
.IR k =1;
.IR k =0
is equivalent to
.IR k =1);
if
.I k
is omitted, return to the most recent lower indent level.
.XX .EX x
Begin example.
Example text is set in the monowidth font,
using no-fill mode and an indented block format.
If
.I x
is ``\*(mW-1\f1'',
the point size and vertical spacing is reduced one point.
.XX .EE
End example.
.XX .PM m\0y
Produces the appropriate proprietary marking at the bottom of the page.
Usage for
.I m
is:
.EX
P    \f3AT&T \- Proprietary\fP
RS   \f3AT&T \- Proprietary (Restricted)\fP
RG   \f3AT&T \- Proprietary (Registered)\fP
CR   \f1Copyright notice\fP
UW   \f1Unpublished Work notice\fP
CP   \f1See Cover Page notice\fP
.EE
.I y
is the year used in the date for the copyright notice
(default is current year).
.XX .OP "opt\0arg\0x\0y"
\&
.br
Produce a command line option of the form
.OP \-f file
where
.I opt
is the option flag,
.I arg
is the option argument,
.I x
is regular-font text appended to the argument, and
.I y
is regular-font text prepended to the option.
If
.I x
is ``\*(mW[]\f1'' the option is enclosed in square brackets (e.g.,
``\*(mW.OP\ -f\ file\ []\f1''
produces
.OP -f file []
on output).
.XX .DT
Restore default tab settings (every \(12-inch).
.XX .PD v
Set the interparagraph distance to
.I v
vertical spaces.
If
.I v
is omitted, set the interparagraph distance to the default value
(0.4v in
.BR troff ,
1v in
.BR nroff ).
.XX .B text
Make
.I text
bold; if
.I text
is missing, switch to bold font.
.XX .I text
Make
.I text
italic; if
.I text
is missing, switch to italic font.
.XX .MW text
Make
.I text
monowidth (e.g., typewriter-like); if
.I text
is missing, switch to monowidth font
(also known as constant-width).
.XX .SM text
Make
.I text
one point smaller than default point size.
.XX .SB text
Make
.I text
one point smaller and bold.
.XX .R text
Make
.I text
roman; if
.I text
is missing, switch to roman font.
.XX .RI a\0b
Concatenate roman
.I a
with italic
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .IR a\0b
Concatenate italic
.I a
with roman
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .RB a\0b
Concatenate roman
.I a
with bold
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .BR a\0b
Concatenate bold
.I a
with roman
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .BI a\0b
Concatenate bold
.I a
with italic
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .IB a\0b
Concatenate italic
.I a
with bold
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .MR a\0b
Concatenate monowidth
.I a
with roman
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .RM a\0b
Concatenate roman
.I a
with monowidth
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .MI a\0b
Concatenate monowidth
.I a
with italic
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .IM a\0b
Concatenate italic
.I a
with monowidth
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .MB a\0b
Concatenate monowidth
.I a
with bold
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.XX .BM a\0b
Concatenate bold
.I a
with monowidth
.IR b ;
alternate these fonts for up to six arguments.
.sp 0.5v
.in -\nXu
The following strings are defined:
.EX
Rg     \f1registered mark symbol: \*(Rg\fP
Tm     \f1trademark symbol: \*(Tm\fP
Sm     \f1service mark symbol: \*(Sm\fP
lq     \f1left quote: \*(lq (\fP"\f1 in \f3nroff\f1)\*(mW 
rq     \f1right quote: \*(rq (\fP"\f1 in \f3nroff\f1)\*(mW
S      \f1changes to the default point size\fP
mW     \f1changes to the monowidth font (bold in \f3nroff\f1)\*(mW
mB     \f1changes to the monowidth-bold font (bold in \f3nroff\f1)\*(mW
.EE
The
.MW .TH
macro assigns default values to these number registers:
.EX
IN     \f1Left margin indent relative to subheads\fP
LL     \f1Line length including indent from register \fPIN
PD     \f1Current interparagraph distance\fP
.EE
Additional macros taken from the Research V10 system version of
.BR man(5):
.in +\nXu
.XX .HY
Turn hyphenation on.
.XX .F text
Set
.I text
in the file font (monowidth); if
.I text
is missing, switch to file-font.
.XX .FR "a\0b\0\(el"
Concatenate file-font
.I a
with roman
.IR "b \(el" .
.XX .L text
Set text in the literal font (monowidth); if
.I text
is missing, switch to literal-font.
.XX .LR "a\0b"
Concatenate literal font
.I a
with roman
.IR b .
.XX .RF "a\0b\0c"
Concatenate roman
.I a
with file-font
.I b
and roman
.IR c .
.XX .RL "a\0b\0c"
Concatenate roman
.I a
with literal-font
.I b
and roman
.IR c .
.XX .TF text
Indented paragraph; set hanging label
.I text
in monowidth font.
.in -\nXu
.ds t \f1\s-1\|\(->\|\s+1\fP
.sp 0.5v
Additional macros taken from various
.SM UCB
systems' version of
.BR man(5):
.in +\nXu
.XX .AC t
Use
.I t
as title heading for
.SM "IBM ACIS"
distribution.
.XX .AT t
Use
.I t
as title heading for
.SM BSD
distribution.
.XX .DE
End display.
.XX .DS
Start display.
Display text is set in no-fill mode as an indented block.
.XX .IX "a\ b\ c\ d\ e\ f"
Generate index entry;
write arguments and current page number to
.I stderr
as:
.br
\*(mW   .IE\*tENTRY\*t\f2a\*tb\*tc\*td\*te\*tf\*tpage\f1
.br
where \*t represents a tab and
.I page
is the page number field used elsewhere on the manual page (e.g., ``Page 15''). 
.XX .LX u
Limitations statement for
.SM NFS
distribution;
.I u
is the utility type (e.g., utility, file, system call).
.XX .SB text
Set
.I text
in smaller point size and bold font.
.XX .SU t
Use
.I t
as title heading for SunOS distribution.
.XX .TX x
Use abbreviation code
.I x
to resolve title reference for SunOS distribution.
.XX .UC t
Use
.I t
as title heading for
.SM BSD
distribution.
.XX .VE
End version changes.
.XX .VS m
Start version changes.
If mark
.I m
is 4, use small vertical bar as margin character.
.in -\nXu

